status
======

:Purpose: Display status summary.
:Usage:   brz status [FILE...]

:Options:
  -c ARG, --change=ARG  Select changes introduced by the specified revision.
                        See also "help revisionspec".
  -h, --help            Show help message.
  --no-classify         Do not mark object type using indicator.
  --no-pending          Don't show pending merges.
  -q, --quiet           Only display errors and warnings.
  -r ARG, --revision=ARG
                        See "help revisionspec" for details.
  -S, --short           Use short status indicators.
  --show-ids            Show internal object ids.
  --usage               Show usage message and options.
  -v, --verbose         Display more information.
  -V, --versioned       Only show versioned files.

:Description:
  This reports on versioned and unknown files, reporting them
  grouped by state.  Possible states are:
  
  added
      Versioned in the working copy but not in the previous revision.
  
  removed
      Versioned in the previous revision but removed or deleted
      in the working copy.
  
  renamed
      Path of this file changed from the previous revision;
      the text may also have changed.  This includes files whose
      parent directory was renamed.
  
  modified
      Text has changed since the previous revision.
  
  kind changed
      File kind has been changed (e.g. from file to directory).
  
  unknown
      Not versioned and not matching an ignore pattern.
  
  Additionally for directories, symlinks and files with a changed
  executable bit, Breezy indicates their type using a trailing
  character: '/', '@' or '*' respectively. These decorations can be
  disabled using the '--no-classify' option.
  
  To see ignored files use 'brz ignored'.  For details on the
  changes to file texts, use 'brz diff'.
  
  Note that --short or -S gives status flags for each item, similar
  to Subversion's status command. To get output similar to svn -q,
  use brz status -SV.
  
  If no arguments are specified, the status of the entire working
  directory is shown.  Otherwise, only the status of the specified
  files or directories is reported.  If a directory is given, status
  is reported for everything inside that directory.
  
  Before merges are committed, the pending merge tip revisions are
  shown. To see all pending merge revisions, use the -v option.
  To skip the display of pending merge information altogether, use
  the no-pending option or specify a file/directory.
  
  To compare the working directory to a specific revision, pass a
  single revision to the revision argument.
  
  To see which files have changed in a specific revision, or between
  two revisions, pass a revision range to the revision argument.
  This will produce the same results as calling 'brz diff --summarize'.

:Aliases:  st, stat
:See also: :doc:`diff <diff-help>`, :doc:`revert <revert-help>`, :doc:`status-flags <status-flags-help>`


